# Social Media Intelligence
### School of Information
### The University of British Columbia

**Course title:** Social Media Intelligence: LIBR 559D 

**Program:** MLIS, Dual

**Year:** Winter Session II 2018

**Time:** Monday. 9:00–11:50 p.m.

**Location:** SLAIS Terrace Lab 

**Instructor:** Dr. Muhammad Abdul-Mageed

**Office location:** 494

**Office phone:** 6048-274-530

**Office hours:** Tues. 10:00am-12:00pm or by appointment. *(I can also handle inquiries via email or Skype 
if Mondays are not possible for you.)*

**E-mail address:** muhammad.mageed@ubc.ca

**iSchool@UBC Student Portal:** <http://canvas.ubc.ca>


## 1.	Course Rationale & Goal: 

**Rationale/Background:** As social networks like Facebook, Twitter, and YouTube continue to play an important role in mediated communication today, be it at organizational or individual levels, the volume of data generated by their users increase phenomenally. Accordingly, searches and processing of social Web data beyond the limiting level of surface words are becoming increasingly important to business and governmental bodies, as well as to lay Web users. Detection of sentiment, emotion, deception, gender, sarcasm, age, perspective, topic, community, and personality are all valuable social meaning components that promise to be important elements of next generation search engines. The emerging area of extracting social meaning from social network data using automated methods is known as Social Media Intelligence (SMI). 

**Goal:** This course provides a graduate-level introduction to Social Media Intelligence (SMI) and its associated methods. The goal of the course is to create an interactive learning community around the theme of SMI. This includes familiarizing students with the types and uses of social media, and providing a basic level of hands-on experience in managing, analyzing, and mining social data using available tools (e.g., dashboards) and automated methods (e.g., natural language processing and machine learning technologies). We will read, discuss, and critique claims and findings from contemporary research related to SMI. We will also address practical issues related to successfully managing social media platforms, launching marketing campaigns, and using tools to analyze and mine social media. 

**Potential audiences for this course are:**

* People interested in text analytics, information retrieval, information visualization, human-information interaction, natural language processing, machine learning, etc., who want to prepare for, or significantly advance, carrying out research in these fields. 
* People interested in an introductory level of practical experience on effective usage, management, analytics, and mining of social media in work places (e.g., libraries, museums, companies).

## 2.	Course Objectives: 
Upon completion of this course students will be able to:

* Understand a wide range of social media usage, management, and mining concepts and tasks and their relevance to the information needs of diverse individuals, communities and organizations. [1.1]
* Enhance interpersonal and written communication skills. [2.1]
* Collaborate effectively with peers through course assignments. [3.1]
* Apply social media marketing, management, and mining methods to address information needs, questions, and issues. [4.1]
## 3.	Course Topics:
* Social media types and use and their role;
* Social media marketing and management;
* Social data crawling and engineering;
* Predictive analytics with natural language processing & machine learning;
* Practical social media intelligence tasks:
* Age and gender detection;
* Misinformation & fake news;
* Sentiment analysis; 
* Emotion detection;

## 4.	Prerequisites:  
* MLIS and Dual MAS/MLIS: Completion of MLIS Core or permission of SLAIS Graduate Advisor.
* Access to a computer: There will be machines in the lab where class is held, but you will need to use your own machine or have access to a machine on a regular basis. You should make your own arrangements for this.

## 5.	Format of the course: 
•	This course will involve lectures, class hands-on activities, individual and group work, and instructor-, peer-, and self-assessment. 

## 6. Course syllabus:
**Required book:**
* Buyer, L. (2013). Social PR Secrets: How to Optimize, Socialize, and Publicize Your Brand's News (3rd ed.). ISBN-10: 1938886852, ISBN-13: 978-1938886850.
* Bird, S., Klein, E., & Loper, E. (2009). Natural language processing with Python. O'Reilly Media, Inc. [link](http://www.nltk.org/book/)

**Other required and Recommended Reading:** 
* Weekly readings will be assigned from materials available through the UBC library and online.

## 7. Calendar / Weekly schedule and readings (tentative)

| Week | Date   | Topic                            | Readings     | What is due/out            |
|------|--------|----------------------------------|----------------|----------------------------|
| 1    |  Jan. 8  | <ul><li>Course overview</li></ul>  |   |                            |
| 2    | Jan. 15  | <ul><li>Intro. to social media </li></ul> |    |           |
| 3    |  Jan. 22 |  Social publishing |                |
| 4    | Jan. 29 |  Social media management |                |
| 5    |  Feb. 5 |  Analytics with NLP I |              |
| 6    | Feb.12 |  Family Day: No class |               |
| 7    | Feb. 19 | Mid-Term Break: No class |               |
| 8    |  Feb. 26 |  Analytics with NLP II |                |
| 9    | March 5 |  Data Crawling |                |
| 10    | March 12 |  Sentiment and Emotion |                |
| 11   |  March 19 |  Age and gender detection |                |
| 12   |  March 26 |  Misinformation & fake news |              |
| 13   |  April 2|  Student Presentations & Wrap-Up |              |



## 8. Course Assignments/Grades:
| Assignment | Due date | Weight |
| ---------- | -------- | ------ |
| Professionalization & Class Participation |  Throughout | 15% |
| ASSIGNMENT 1: Social Media in Professional Settings Report |  Week 3: Jan. 22 | 20% |
| ASSIGNMENT 2: Analysis and evaluation of a professional social media source |  Week 7: Feb. 19th | 25% |
| ASSIGNMENT 3_A: Project Proposal |    Week 10: March 12 | 5% |
| ASSIGNMENT 3_B: Term Project (GROUP of 3) |   April 9   | 35% |



## 9. Course Policies

**Attendance:** The UBC calendar states: “Regular attendance is expected of students in all their classes (including lectures, laboratories, tutorials, seminars, etc.). Students who neglect their academic work and assignments may be excluded from the final examinations. Students who are unavoidably absent because of illness or disability should report to their instructors on return to classes.”

**Evaluation:** All assignments will be marked using the evaluative criteria given in this syllabus and also those provided on the SLAIS web site. 


**Access & Diversity:** Access & Diversity works with the University to create an inclusive living and learning environment in which all students can thrive. The University accommodates students with disabilities who have registered with the [Access and Diversity unit](https://students.ubc.ca/about-student-services/access-diversity). You must register with the Disability Resource Centre to be granted special accommodations for any on-going conditions. 
**Religious Accommodation:** The University accommodates students whose religious obligations conflict with attendance, submitting assignments, or completing scheduled tests and examinations. Please let your instructor know in advance, preferably in the first week of class, if you will require any accommodation on these grounds. Students who plan to be absent for varsity athletics, family obligations, or other similar commitments, cannot assume they will be accommodated, and should discuss their commitments with the instructor before the course drop date. [UBC policy on Religious Holidays](http://www.universitycounsel.ubc.ca/policies/policy65.pdf).

## Academic Integrity
**Plagiarism**
The Faculty of Arts considers plagiarism to be the most serious academic offence that a student can commit. Regardless of whether or not it was committed intentionally, plagiarism has serious academic consequences and can result in expulsion from the university. Plagiarism involves the improper use of somebody else's words or ideas in one's work. 

It is your responsibility to make sure you fully understand what plagiarism is. Many students who think they understand plagiarism do in fact commit what UBC calls "reckless plagiarism." Below is an excerpt on reckless plagiarism from UBC Faculty of Arts' leaflet, [Plagiarism Avoided: Taking Responsibility for Your Work](http://www.arts.ubc.ca/arts-students/plagiarism-avoided.html).

"The bulk of plagiarism falls into this category. Reckless plagiarism is often the result of careless research, poor time management, and a lack of confidence in your own ability to think critically. Examples of reckless plagiarism include:

* Taking phrases, sentences, paragraphs, or statistical findings from a variety of sources and piecing them together into an essay (piecemeal plagiarism);
* Taking the words of another author and failing to note clearly that they are not your own. In other words, you have not put a direct quotation within quotation marks;
* Using statistical findings without acknowledging your source;
* Taking another author's idea, without your own critical analysis, and failing to acknowledge that this idea is not yours;
* Paraphrasing (i.e. rewording or rearranging words so that your work resembles, but does not copy, the original) without acknowledging your source;
* Using footnotes or material quoted in other sources as if they were the results of your own research; and
* Submitting a piece of work with inaccurate text references, sloppy footnotes, or incomplete source (bibliographic) information."

Bear in mind that this is only one example of the different forms of plagiarism. Before preparing for their written assignments, students are strongly encouraged to familiarize themselves with the following source on plagiarism: the [Academic Integrity Resource Centre](http://help.library.ubc.ca/researching/academic-integrity).

If after reading these materials you still are unsure about how to properly use sources in your work, please ask me for clarification. Students are held responsible for knowing and following all University regulations regarding academic dishonesty. If a student does not know how to properly cite a source or what constitutes proper use of a source it is the student's personal responsibility to obtain the needed information and to apply it within University guidelines and policies. If evidence of academic dishonesty is found in a course assignment, previously submitted work in this course may be reviewed for possible academic dishonesty and grades modified as appropriate. UBC policy requires that all suspected cases of academic dishonesty must be forwarded to the Dean for possible action. 

